
## Discussion

Metal3D predicts the probability distribution of zinc ions in protein crystal structures based on a neuronal network model trained on natural protein environments. The model performs a segmentation task to determine if a specific point in the input space contains a zinc ion or not. Metal3D predicts zinc ion sites with high accuracy making use of high resolution crystal structures (<2.5 Å). The use of high resolution structures is necessary because at resolutions greater than the average zinc ligand coordination distance (2.2 Å) the uncertainty of the zinc location noticeably increases [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d] which would likely hamper the accuracy of the site prediction.


In contrast to currently available tools, for Metal3D, it is not necessary to filter the training examples for certain coordination requirements (i.e only sites with at least 2 protein ligands). The model thus sees the whole diversity of zinc ion sites present in the PDB.  Such a model is advantageous since metalloprotein design workflows require models to score the full continuum of zinc sites starting from a suboptimal binding site only populated at high metal concentration to a highly organized zinc site in an enzyme with nanomolar metal affinity. The predicted probability can be used as a confidence metric or as an optimization target where mutations are made to increase probability of zinc binding.

### Site quality
The fraction of artifactual zinc binding sites in the PDB is estimated to be about 1/3 [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d] similar to our test set used with 70% (133) well coordinated zinc sites with at least 2 distinct protein ligands. To reduce the amount of artifactual sites in the training set we presented the model with as many complete sites as possible by using crystal symmetry to add adjacent coordinating protein chains. The frequency of artifacts in the training set is therefore much lower than 30 %. The sites which still remain incomplete or that are wrongly modeled and not excluded through the resolution cutoffs and filtering procedures likely present only a small fraction of the training set and their signal is drowned out by the numerical superiority of the correctly modeled sites. If the model is used on artifactual sites or partially disordered ones it can still predict the metal location with high spatial accuracy but often indicates a lower confidence for the prediction (Figures @fig:2cbaprobabilities and @fig:alphafold). 

Metal ion locators that rely on homology such as MIB perform worse on partial binding sites because reducing the quality of the available templates by including 1- or 2-coordinate sites would yield many false positives (similar to including less homologous structures for the template search). The deep learning based Metal3D can likely circumvent this because it does not require any engineered features to predict the location of the metal and learns directly from a full representation of the environment surrounding the binding site. This allows looking at low confidence sites in the context of a given environment. 

### Influence of non-protein ligands

Exogenous ligands play an important role for metals in biology as all empty coordination sites of metals are filled with water molecules in case there is no other exogenous ligand with higher affinity present (e.g. a thiol).  Like other predictors, both Metal1D and Metal3D do not consider water molecules or other ligands in the input as the quality of ligand molecules in the PDB varies [@pmid:3736419;@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.2c00306].  In addition, other potential sources of input such as AlphaFold do not provide explicit waters wherefore models should not rely on water as an input source. It is also not possible to use in silico water predictions because common water placement algorithms to place deep waters [@doi:10.1002/prot.25081; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0172743; @doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.2c00306] either rely on metal ions being present in the input or ignore them completely.  Moreover, in protein design algorithms, water is usually only implicitly modeled (e.g. in Rosetta). 

For Metal3D, the input channel that encodes the total heavy atom density also encodes an implicit water density where all empty space can be interpreted as the solvent. For Metal1D, the contribution of water molecules is considered in an implicit way when the score is assigned to a site by considering coordinations including water compatible with the one observed (e.g. a HIS<sub>3</sub>Wat site is equivalent to a His<sub>3</sub> site for the scoring).


### Choice of architecture
This work is the first to report a modern deep learning based model destined for identification of metal ligands in proteins. Similar approaches have been used in the more general field of protein-ligand docking where a variety of architectures and representations have been used. 3D CNN based approaches such as LigVoxel [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty583] and DeepSite [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx350)] commonly use a resolution of 1 Å and similar input features as our model to predict the ligand density. However, predicting the density of a multi-atomic ligand is more complex than predicting the density of mononuclear metal ions. We therefore did not deem it necessary to include a conditioning on how many metal ions are present in the box and rather chose to reflect this in the training data where the model needs to learn that only about half of the environments it sees contain one or more metals. This choice is validated by the fact that the output probability densities at sufficiently high probability cutoffs are spherical with their radius approximately matching the van der Waals radius of zinc.

Mesh convolutional neural networks trained on a protein surface representation [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0666-6] also have been used to predict the location and identity of protein ligands but this approach can only label the regions of the surface that bind the metal ion and is conceptually not able to return the exact location of the metal. Some metal ion binding sites are also heavily buried inside proteins as they mediate structural stability rendering them inaccessible to a surface based approach. The most recent approaches such as EquiBind [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2202.05146] use equivariant neural networks such as En-Transformer [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2102.09844] to predict binding keypoints (defined as 1/2 distance between the Cɑ of the binding residue and a ligand atom). Explicit side chains are still too expensive for such models and these models assume a fixed known stoichiometry of the protein and ligand. Metal3D can also deal with proteins that do not bind a metal and does not assume that the amount of ions is known. The lack of explicit side chain information renders equivariant models unsuitable for the design of complex metal ion binding sites supported by an intricate network of hydrogen bonds that need to be positioned with sub-angstrom accuracy. Our model in contrast is less data- and compute-efficient than approaches representing the protein as graph due to the need to voxelize the input and provide different rotations of the input environment in training but the overall processing time for our model is still low taking typically 25 seconds for a 250 residue protein on a multicore GPU workstation.
Sequence based models [@doi:10.1101/2021.12.22.473759;@doi:10.1038/s41598-018-34533-1] can only use coevolution signals to infer residues in spatial proximity that can bind a metal. This might be difficult when it comes to ranking similar amino acids such as aspartate and glutamate or even ranking different rotamers where sub-angstrom level precision is needed to identify the mutant with the highest affinity for zinc. 

### Selectivity

In terms of selectivity both of our methods have a clear preference for transition metals over main group metals after having been trained exclusively on zinc binding sites. The only sites that Metal3D identifies for sodium in the test set are the ones that have side chain ligands. Many sodium and potassium sites are using backbone carbonyl coordination exclusively, which is not common for zinc and those sites are therefore not detected. Both of our methods could be rapidly adapted to predict not only location but also the identity of the metal. In the framework of Metal3D even a semantic metal prediction would be possible where the same model predicts different output channels for each metal it was trained on. To achieve perfect selectivity using such a model will be difficult because sometimes non-native metals are used for crystallization experiments. In this work we chose to work exclusively with zinc because it is the most redox stable transition metal and because many training examples are available. 


### Application for protein design
Protein design using 3DCNNs trained on residue identity has been successfully demonstrated and we anticipate that our model could be seamlessly integrated into such a workflow[@doi:10.1038/s41467-022-28313-9] to enable fully deep learning based design of metalloproteins. We are currently also investigating the combination of Metal3D combined with a classic energy-based genetic algorithm-based optimization to make design of metalloproteins [@doi:10.1021/jacs.7b10660] easier without having to explicitly model the metal to compute the stability of the protein. As the model computes a probability density per residue it can be readily integrated into established software like Rosetta relying on rotamer sampling.


The HCA2 application demonstrates the utility of Metal3D for protein engineering  (Figure @fig:2cbaprobabilities). The thermodynamics of metal ion binding to proteins are complicated [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j] and there are currently no high-throughput based experimental approaches that could generate a dataset large enough to train a model directly on predicting K<sub>d</sub>. The data we use were obtained from a colorimetric assay with very high affinity of zinc in the picomolar range [@doi:10.1021/bi00255a003;@doi:10.1021/ja00079a046;@doi:10.1021/bi00089a005;@doi:10.1073/pnas.92.11.5017;@doi:10.1021/bi9526692]. More recent studies using ITC [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j]  instead of the colorimetric assay indicate lower K<sub>d</sub> values  in the nanomolar range for wild type HCA2. We can therefore only use the colorimetric data to estimate how well the model can recapitulate relative changes in the K<sub>d</sub> for different mutations in the first and second shell of a prototypical metalloprotein. 


Metal3D allows moving away from using rational approaches such as the i, i + 4 di His motifs used for the assembly and stabilization of metalloproteins to a fully automated approach where potential metal binding configurations can be scored computationally. [@doi:10.1126/science.8346440; @doi:10.1126/science.1648261; @doi:10.1038/nsb723]

### Metal1D vs. Metal3D
Metal1D is inferior to Metal3D for the prediction of metal ion binding sites because it produces more false positives while at the same time detecting fewer metal sites. Also the positioning of sites is somewhat imprecise. This demonstrates the inherent limitation of using solely distance based features for prediction of metal location. BioMetAll which is the tool most similar to Metal1D also suffers from many false positive predictions. In contrast, Metal1D is more data-efficient than Metal3D and provides predictions faster. 





<!-- 
Choice of resolution cutoff
Zinc The average bond length corresponds to a resolution of ∼2.2 Å. Also, the deviation increases noticeably after the resolution exceeds 2.5 Å. [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d]

Why were nucleic structures excluded? Why include all zinc sites and not just the good ones?


model choice? Why are CNNs better than equivariant approaches for this kind of work?. Recent work EquiDock uses no sidechains at all, gets ligand RMSD where only 25% are under a 2 threshold, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.05146.pdf Mean RMSD 8.3 A, Centroid 42.4


MIB discards all sites with less than 2 coordination partners so it will not be able to identify labile binding sites. 

Discuss 4L99 which is one of the FN for the model. Here are Lysine next to the zinc and therefore probability is low.Could be wrongly modeled (carboxlyated lysine instead of normal lysine) [@doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00422-9] but some leucyl aminopeptidases also have this coordination. (check 10.1515/BC.2006.191 to find mechanism)


discuss why water molecules were not considered. considered only implicitly. Might be integrated in future but needs quality check for existing waters in training/test set 
Methods [References Dowser] that place deep waters but they do not know about metals. 


Lack in selectivity could be related to smoothing the gaussian quite a bit when training (anything >0.05) is a hit. 
Resolution of grid might be an issue 
Might be improved by improving the grid resolution to 0.5  

Discuss selectivity. E.g based on [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0906852107]. Zinc prefers tetrahedral coordination, whereas e.g copper(II) (and maybe CU(I)- check it) prefers square planar which might explain a bit lower selctivity. In the work by Tezcan the protein assemblies form different complexes with the different metals. 

General implications for the faint metal ion binding sites detected using the model: This is evident from the fact that unstructured polypeptides and folded proteins alike often form aggregates in the presence of high concentrations of transition metals.
Once the entropic cost of association is overcome, the resulting noncovalent interfaces can be optimized through additional mutations
 These nonspecific interactions could explain why free zinc concentration is tightly controlled in cellular environments; the total concentration of zinc in cells is about 200 μM, but the concentration of free zinc is only picomolar[@doi:10.1021/cr800556u].

From a practical inorganic chemical viewpoint individual proteins can be utilized as large polydentate ligands that bring along the advantage of having extensive functionalizable surfaces. From a functional perspective metals possess properties such as Lewis acidity and redox reactivity that enable them to carry out catalytic transformations not accessible by organic building blocks.

Our tool allows to move away from using rational approaches such as the  i, i + 4 diHis motifs used for the assembly and stabilization of metalloproteins and peptides through coordination of divalent transition metal ions to a more knowledgebased approach. [@doi:10.1126/science.8346440; @doi:10.1126/science.1648261; @doi:10.1038/nsb723]


Moreover, one-third of the zinc ions present in crystal structures are artifacts, merely aiding crystal formation and packing with no biological significance [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d]

 The small size of the Zn(II) cation (∼74 pm for four-coordinate and ∼88 pm for six-coordinate ion) prevents higher coordination numbers due to molecular repulsion and higher energy orbitals

Discussion with DeepSite which uses a sliding box approach and does not give individual residue scores. Therefore less useful for protein design. -->


 <!-- KD values discussion (new ITC data vs. old data by Kiefer, Fierke etc): 
 
 Old method: Enzyme-
bound zinc (E—Zn) was quantitated using the colorimetric
4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) method of Hunt et al.
(1984) and measuring the absorbance at 500 nm. 4-(2-Pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) is a dibasic acid that forms the protonated complexes with most metal ions. It serves as a metallochromic indicator and is suitable as a chromogenic agent for the quantitative determination of over 50 elements.

removing unbound zinc by chromatography on a
PD-10 column, and measuring the protein concentration and
bound zinc concentration in the eluant using the PAR assay
(Hunt et al., 1984).
The concentration of free zinc in the
dialysis buffer was calculated from the Tris—zinc stability
constants (Dawson et al., 1986). The dissociation constant
was calculated using KaleidaGraph program with eq:
[E-ZN]/[E]tot = C/(1+Kd/[Zn]free)

Newer method: [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j]
 -->
