
## Discussion

Metal3D predicts the probability distribution of zinc in protein crystal structures based on a model trained on natural protein environments. The model performs a segmentation task to determine if a specific point in the input space contains zinc or not. Metal3D predicts zinc sites with high accuracy making use of high resolution crystal structures (<2.5 Å). The use of high resolution structures is necessary because at resolution greater than the average zinc ligand coordination distance (2.2 Å) the  uncertainty of the zinc location noticeably increases [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d] which would likely hamper the accuracy of the model. 
In contrast to currently available tools, for Metal3D we did not filter the training examples for certain coordination requirements (i.e only sites with at least 2 protein ligands). This allows the model to also predict sites with partial coordination. Such a model is necessary as protein design software requires models to score the full continuum of zinc sites starting from a nucleus binding site to a highly organized zinc site in an enzyme. The predicted probability can be used as a confidence metric or as optimization target where mutations are made to increase probability of zinc binding. Methods which rely on homology such as MIB perform worse on partial binding sites because reducing the quality of the available templates by including 1- or 2-coordinate sites would yield many false positives (similar to including less homologous structures for the template search). The same is true for distance based predictors such as Metal1D. In order to reduce the amount of false positives, low quality sites need to be excluded during training of those models. The deep learning based Metal3D likely can circumvent this because it does not require any engineered features to predict the location of the metal and learns directly from a full representation of the environment surrounding the binding pocket. This allows to look at low confidence sites in the context of the given environment. 

### Influence of non-protein ligands
The majority of sites in the training set are well coordinated sites and during training the model can relate the frequency of different zinc ion binding motifs in the training set with the probability of metal presence. The fraction of artifactual zinc binding site in the PDB is estimated to be about 1/3 [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d] similar to the test set used with 70% (133) well coordinated zinc sites. As we train on biological assemblies some of those binding sites might be located at the surface of the assembly whereas in the asymmetric unit of the crystal they might form part of a crystal contact. While we tried to present the model with as many complete sites as possible by using crystal symmetry to add the symmetry adjacent protein chains in the training environment non-protein ligands are not included. For some sites the model is therefore missing information on one or more coordination partners. 

Empty coordination sites of metals are filled with water molecules in case there is no other exogenous ligand with higher affinity present (e.g a thiol). Both Metal1D and Metal3D do not consider water molecules or other ligands in the input as the quality of ligand molecules in the PDB varies [@pmid:3736419]<!-- paper from 1986, we can also look for something more recent -->. In addition,  other potential sources of input such as AlphaFold do not provide explicit waters wherefore models should not rely on water as an input source. Moreover, in protein design algorithms water is usually only implicitly modeled (e.g in Rosetta). Common water placement algorithms to place deep waters [@doi:10.1002/prot.25081; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0172743] are not able to take into account the presence of metal ions when placing water molecules. For Metal3D the input channel that encodes the total heavy atom density however encodes an implicit water density where all empty space can be interpreted as the solvent. For Metal1D, the contribution of water molecules is considered in an implicit way when the score is assigned to a site by considering coordinations including water compatible to the one observed (for example, the weight of a HHHO coordination in the probability map, where O is a water molecule, is added to the total score in case of a HHH coordination available). 

### Choice of architecture
This work is the first to report a modern deep learning based model destined for identification of metal ligands in proteins. Placement of a metal ion is similar to protein-ligand docking where a variety of architectures and representations have been used. 3D CNN based approaches such as LigVoxel[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty583] and DeepSite [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx350)] commonly use a resolution of 1 Å and similar input features as our model to predict the ligand density. However, predicting the density of a multi-nuclear ligand is more complex than predicting the density of mononuclear metal ions. We therefore did not deem it necessary to include a conditioning on how many metal ions are present in the box and rather chose to reflect this in the training data where the model needs to learn that only about half of the environments it sees contain one or more metals. This choice is validated by the fact that the output probability densities at sufficiently high probability cutoff are spherical with their radius approximately matching the van der Waals radius of zinc.  Mesh convolutional neural networks trained on a protein surface representation [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0666-6] also have been used to predict the location and identity of protein ligands but this approach can only label the regions of the surface that bind the metal ion is conceptually not able to return the exact location of the metal. Some metal ion binding sites are also heavily buried inside proteins as they mediate structural stability rendering them inaccessible to a surface based approach. The most recent approaches such as EquiBind [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2202.05146] use equivariant neural networks such as En-Transformer [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2102.09844] to predict binding keypoints (defined as 1/2 distance between the Cɑ of the binding residue and a ligand atom). Explicit sidechains are still too expensive for such models and these models assume a fixed stoichiometry of the protein and ligand. Metal3D can also deal with proteins that do not bind a metal at all or bind multiple zincs.  The lack of explicit sidechain information  renders equivariant models unsuitable for the design of complex metal ion binding sites supported by an intricate network of hydrogen bonds that need to be positioned with sub-angstrom accuracy. Our model in contrast is less data-efficient than approaches representing the protein as graph due to the need to voxelize the input and provide different rotations of the input environment in training. For inference our model is fast with about 25 seconds processing time for a 250 residue protein.  
In contrast to sequence based models [@doi:10.1101/2021.12.22.473759;@doi:10.1038/s41598-018-34533-1] our model is more data-efficient and better suited to be integrated into structure based design workflows such as Rosetta or EVOLVE. Sequence based approaches can only use coevolution signals to infer residues in spatial proximity that can bind a metal. This might be difficult when it comes to ranking similar amino acids such as aspartate and glutamate or even ranking different rotamers where subangstrom level precision is needed to identify the mutant with the highest affinity for zinc.
<!-- Not relevant I think Standard machine learning models such as Random Forest have been used for classifying metal sites as enzymatic or non-enzymatic using features computed using Rosetta and from the identity of the amino acids [@doi:10.1038/s41467-021-24070-3] however such models require extensive feature engineering. The architecture that we propose is amenable to related tasks other than -->




### Selectivity

In terms of selectivity both of our methods have a clear preference for transition metals over main group metals after having been trained exclusively on zinc binding sites. The only sites that Metal3D identifies for sodium in the test set are the ones that have sidechain ligands. Many sodium and potassium sites are using backbone carbonyl coordination exclusively, which is not common for zinc and those sites are therefore not detected. It has recently been demonstrated how a specific transition metal can be selectively bound to a protein [@doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04469-8]. This however was only achieved using non-ideal coordination which is better tolerated by some transition metals due to the different electronic configurations. It is likely impossible to train a predictor that can perfectly discriminate zinc from e.g copper and nickel sites because the natural coordination environments and coordination distances within the given resolution threshold are almost indistinguishable with many sites being promiscous. The availability of specific metals inside the organism is heavily compartmentalized, therefore an approach using solely the structure will be unable to capture the full selectivity. In addition, sometimes non-native metals are used for crystallization experiments because the reaction catalyzed by an active site metal might exhibit different kinetics with different metals. The metal in the deposited structure might therefore not be the native metal. In this work we chose to work with zinc only because it is redox stable and because many training environments are available. Our scheme could be rapidly adapted to train a predictor that outputs different channels for different metals. 

### Application for protein design
Protein design using 3DCNNs trained on residue identity has been successfully demonstrated and we anticipate that our model could be seamlessly integrated into such a workflow [@doi:10.1038/s41467-022-28313-9] to enable fully deep learning based design of metalloproteins. We are currently investigating the combination of Metal3D combined with a classic energy-based genetic algorithm-based optimization to make design of metalloproteins easier without having to model explicitly the metal to compute the stability of the protein. As the model computes a probability density per residue it can be readily integrated in standard workflows relying on rotamer sampling. 

The HCA2 application demonstrates the utility of Metal3D for protein engineering (Figure @fig:2cbaprobabilities). The kinetics of metal ion binding to proteins are complicated [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j] and there are currently no high-throughput based approaches that could generate a dataset large enough to train a model directly on predicting K<sub>d</sub>. The data we use were obtained from a colorimetric assay predicting very high affinity of zinc in the picomolar range [@doi:10.1021/bi00255a003;@doi:10.1021/ja00079a046;@doi:10.1021/bi00089a005;@doi:10.1073/pnas.92.11.5017;@doi:10.1021/bi9526692]. More recent studies using ITC [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j] instead of the colorimetric assay indicate lower K<sub>d</sub> values in the nanomolar range for the wild type. We can therefore only use the colorimetric data to estimate how well the model can recapitulate relative changes in the K<sub>d</sub> for different mutations in the first and second shell of a prototypical metalloprotein. <!--not sure if there needs to be more discussion here on the-->

Metal3D allows moving away from using rational approaches such as the  i, i + 4 diHis motifs used for the assembly and stabilization of metalloproteins and peptides through coordination of divalent transition metal ions to a fully automated approach where potential metalbinding configurations can be scored computationally instead of relying on manual verification. [@doi:10.1126/science.8346440; @doi:10.1126/science.1648261; @doi:10.1038/nsb723]

### Metal1D vs. Metal3D
Metal1D is inferior to Metal3D for the prediction of metal ion binding sites because it produces more false positives while at the same time detecting fewer metal sites. This demonstrates the inherent limitation of using solely distance based features for prediction of metal location. BioMetAll which is the tool most similar to Metal1D also suffers from many false positive predictions. 

Metal3D is the first tool with angstrom level precision to predict the location of metal ion binding sites suitable for the optimization of proteins. We anticipate different applications such as protein-function annotation using structures predicted using AlphaFold[@doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03828-1], integration in protein design software and detection of cryptic metal binding sites that can be used to engineer PPIs. 
Such cryptic metal ion binding sites in common drug targets could also be used to engineer novel metallodrugs. 

Many of these applications allow to explore the still vastly untapped potential of proteins as large programmable multi-dentate metal ligands with tunable surfaces. In particular, it might be easier to design protein binders using metal-mediated interactions as the metal binding can overcome the entropic cost of association of two protein surfaces. Zinc is generally available in the intracellular volume and extracellularly with the total concentration of zinc in cells is estimated to be about about 200 μM [@doi:10.1021/cr800556u]. The real available concentration of free zinc is picomolar[@doi:10.1021/cr800556u] wherefore it is crucial that the design tool produces well designed sites with high spatial precision of the metal ion. 



<!-- 
Choice of resolution cutoff
Zinc The average bond length corresponds to a resolution of ∼2.2 Å. Also, the deviation increases noticeably after the resolution exceeds 2.5 Å. [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d]

Why were nucleic structures excluded? Why include all zinc sites and not just the good ones?


model choice? Why are CNNs better than equivariant approaches for this kind of work?. Recent work EquiDock uses no sidechains at all, gets ligand RMSD where only 25% are under a 2 threshold, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.05146.pdf Mean RMSD 8.3 A, Centroid 42.4


MIB discards all sites with less than 2 coordination partners so it will not be able to identify labile binding sites. 

Discuss 4L99 which is one of the FN for the model. Here are Lysine next to the zinc and therefore probability is low.Could be wrongly modeled (carboxlyated lysine instead of normal lysine) [@doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00422-9] but some leucyl aminopeptidases also have this coordination. (check 10.1515/BC.2006.191 to find mechanism)


discuss why water molecules were not considered. considered only implicitly. Might be integrated in future but needs quality check for existing waters in training/test set 
Methods [References Dowser] that place deep waters but they do not know about metals. 


Lack in selectivity could be related to smoothing the gaussian quite a bit when training (anything >0.05) is a hit. 
Resolution of grid might be an issue 
Might be improved by improving the grid resolution to 0.5  

Discuss selectivity. E.g based on [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0906852107]. Zinc prefers tetrahedral coordination, whereas e.g copper(II) (and maybe CU(I)- check it) prefers square planar which might explain a bit lower selctivity. In the work by Tezcan the protein assemblies form different complexes with the different metals. 

General implications for the faint metal ion binding sites detected using the model: This is evident from the fact that unstructured polypeptides and folded proteins alike often form aggregates in the presence of high concentrations of transition metals.
Once the entropic cost of association is overcome, the resulting noncovalent interfaces can be optimized through additional mutations
 These nonspecific interactions could explain why free zinc concentration is tightly controlled in cellular environments; the total concentration of zinc in cells is about 200 μM, but the concentration of free zinc is only picomolar[@doi:10.1021/cr800556u].

From a practical inorganic chemical viewpoint individual proteins can be utilized as large polydentate ligands that bring along the advantage of having extensive functionalizable surfaces. From a functional perspective metals possess properties such as Lewis acidity and redox reactivity that enable them to carry out catalytic transformations not accessible by organic building blocks.

Our tool allows to move away from using rational approaches such as the  i, i + 4 diHis motifs used for the assembly and stabilization of metalloproteins and peptides through coordination of divalent transition metal ions to a more knowledgebased approach. [@doi:10.1126/science.8346440; @doi:10.1126/science.1648261; @doi:10.1038/nsb723]


Moreover, one-third of the zinc ions present in crystal structures are artifacts, merely aiding crystal formation and packing with no biological significance [@doi:10.1021/ic401072d]

 The small size of the Zn(II) cation (∼74 pm for four-coordinate and ∼88 pm for six-coordinate ion) prevents higher coordination numbers due to molecular repulsion and higher energy orbitals

Discussion with DeepSite which uses a sliding box approach and does not give individual residue scores. Therefore less useful for protein design. -->


 <!-- KD values discussion (new ITC data vs. old data by Kiefer, Fierke etc): 
 
 Old method: Enzyme-
bound zinc (E—Zn) was quantitated using the colorimetric
4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) method of Hunt et al.
(1984) and measuring the absorbance at 500 nm. 4-(2-Pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) is a dibasic acid that forms the protonated complexes with most metal ions. It serves as a metallochromic indicator and is suitable as a chromogenic agent for the quantitative determination of over 50 elements.

removing unbound zinc by chromatography on a
PD-10 column, and measuring the protein concentration and
bound zinc concentration in the eluant using the PAR assay
(Hunt et al., 1984).
The concentration of free zinc in the
dialysis buffer was calculated from the Tris—zinc stability
constants (Dawson et al., 1986). The dissociation constant
was calculated using KaleidaGraph program with eq:
[E-ZN]/[E]tot = C/(1+Kd/[Zn]free)

Newer method: [@doi:10.1021/ic301645j]
 -->
