## Materials and Methods

### Dataset
The input PDB files for training were obtained from the RCSB [@doi:10.1093/nar/28.1.235] protein databank (downloaded 5th March 2021). We use a clustering of the structures at 30% sequence identity using mmseqs2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3988] to largely remove sequence and structural redundancy in the input dataset. 
For each cluster, we check whether a zinc is contained in one of the structures, whether the resolution of these structures is better than 2.5 Å, if the experimental method is x-ray crystallography and whether the structure does not contain nucleic acids. If there are multiple structures fulfilling these criteria, the highest resolution structure is used. All structures larger than 3000 residues are discarded. We always use the first biological assembly to sample the training environments. The structures were stripped of all exogenous ligands except for zinc . If there are multiple models with e.g. alternative residue conformations for a given structure, the first one is used. For each biological assembly we used the symmetry of the asymmetric unit to generate a protein structure that contains all neighboring copies of the protein in the crystal such that metal sites at crystal contacts are fully coordinated.

The train/val/test split was performed based on sequence identity using `easy-search` in mmseqs2. All proteins that had no (partial) sequence overlap with any other protein in the dataset were put into the test/val set (85 proteins) which we further split into a test set of 59 structures and a validation set of 26 structures. The training set contained 2085 structures. (Supplemental Data 1). 

For the analysis, we always used the biological assembly and not the symmetry augmented structure. For the specificity analysis with respect to other transition metals, clusters from the PDB were randomly sampled to extract 25 biological assemblies per metal. 

By default all zinc sites in the test and validation set were used for the analysis. Since some of the sites might be affected by the crystallization conditions, we also created a subset of all sites that contained at least 2 amino acid ligands to largely exclude crystallization artifacts.  To analyze metal ion selectivity, we selected sites with at least 3 unique protein ligands to only use biologically significant sites with a high degree of metal preorganization as such sites should exhibit more selectivity for specific metals compared to sites with only 2 unique protein-ligands. 

### Metal 1D

<!--[Workflow of Metal1D: A probability map is generated based on LINK records extracted from the PDB(red). In the prediction phase(green) metal coordinating residues in the chain are identified and metal site locations are extracted from weighted average of coordinating atoms. The predicted positions are then scored based on the probability map. The final output is the predicted sites ranked based on probability of occurrence of the coordination motif in the PDB.   
](images/metal1D_scheme_large.png){#fig:metal1dworkflow} -->

Metal1D uses a probability map derived from `LINK` records in protein structures (Figure @fig:method). The `LINK` section of a PDB file specifies the connectivity between zinc (or any other metal ion) and the amino acids of the protein, and each `LINK` record specifies one linkage. This is an extension of the approach by Barber-Zucker *et al.*, [@doi:10.1038/s41598-017-16777-5] in which `LINK` records were used to investigate the propensity of transition metals to bind different amino acids. 


Using the training set we generated a probability map for the propensity of different coordination environments to bind a zinc (e.g CCCC, CCHH etc.). For each zinc ion the coordination is extracted from  the`LINK` records excluding records involving only single amino acids (weak binding sites). Also, `LINK` records containing water molecules are excluded because of the difficulties in placing water molecules a posteriori in 3D structures when metal ions are present and because data quality of modelled water molecules varies. The probability map contains the counts of coordination environments found.  <!-- this is results/discussion and does not belong here
<!-- Anyway, in the case of structures where water molecules were placed with high confidence, experimentally or a posteriori, it would be sufficient to change the `IncludeWATER` flag to consider water molecules as all the other residues in the prediction phase. However, this would still rely on a probability map built from the structures in the PDB,  where the location of water molecules is not very consistent. This problem could be overcome in the future, thanks to the increasing number of high-resolution structures available.  -->  
Making a prediction using Metal1D consists of two steps (Figure @fig:method): Identification of possible metal coordinating residues in the structure via the scoring of each amino acid, and scoring of the likelihood of coordination for putative sites predicted by placing a metal between the identified coordinating residues. 


The protein structure is analyzed using the BioPandas python library [@doi:10.21105/joss.00279]. To identify coordinating residues, a per residue score is assigned by performing a geometrical search from a reference point, defined as the coordinate of the most probable metal binding atom, within a search radius considered as roughly twice the typical distance between the metal ion and the binding atom of amino acids in proteins (2.2 ± 0.2 Å as determined from `LINK` records). The search radius used was 5.5 Å in order to be able to take into account also deviations from the ideal coordination. In the case of amino acids which present more than one putative coordinating atom, such as e.g. histidine, the mid-point between the donor atoms is used as reference point and the search radius is enlarged accordingly. The atoms used as reference points for each amino acid and the increase in the search radius are reported in Supplemental Table @tbl:metal1dreferencepoints  .
The score is assigned to each amino acid considering all the other reference points of other amino acids within the search radius, and summing the probabilities in the probability map for coordinations compatible with the one observed. In the ideal case, a score of 1 corresponds to an amino acid surrounded by all possible coordinating amino acids observed in the probability map. In practice, scores result between 0 and < 1. Once all amino acids in the chain are scored, the metal location predictions are made grouping the highest-scored amino acids in clusters (defined as the ones within the chosen threshold with respect to the highest-scored one) based on distance. This is done using  `scipy.spatial.distance_matrix` and grouping together highest-scored amino acids closer than twice the search radius. For each cluster, a site prediction is made as a weighted average between the coordinates of the reference point of each amino acid, using as weighting factor the amino acid score. For isolated amino acids with a high score (e.g. a single histidine) the same score is assigned to the closest reference point from another amino acid, to be able to compute the position of the metal as before. Possible artifacts resulting from this fictitious score are resolved in the final step of the prediction.

After the metal has been placed the likelihood of the putative sites can be assessed by performing a geometrical search centered on the predicted metal coordinates (within 60% of the search radius, i.e. 3.3 Å) and a final score is now assigned to the site. The final score is assigned in the same way as the amino acid scores based on the probability map, and has the advantage of being able to sort the predicted metal sites based on their frequency in the training set. A cutoff parameter is used to exclude sites with a probability lower than a certain threshold with respect to the highest-scored one. This final scoring also mitigates the errors which can be introduced by calculating the coordinates of the site simply as a weighted average excluding or assigning a low probability to the site ending in unfavorable positions in space.   <!-- how does it do that? It just allows to eliminate them no? As it is written now it sounds it changes the position of the metal. -- I added a sentence here to clarify, check if it is clear now-->

### Metal 3D

#### Voxelization
We used the moleculekit python library [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00049; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty583] tto voxelize the input structures into 3D grids. 8 different input channels are used: aromatic, hydrophobic, positive ionizable, negative ionizable, hbond donor, hbond acceptor, occupancy, and metal ion binding site chain (Supplemental Table @tbl:voxelchannels).  The channels are assigned using AutoDockVina atom names and a boolean mask. For each atom matching one of the categories a pair correlation function centered on the atom is used to assign the voxel value [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty583]. For the target tensor only the zinc ions were used for the voxelization. The target tensor was discretized setting any voxel above 0.05 to 1 (true location of zinc), all other to 0 (no zinc). We used a box size of 16 Å centered on the Cɑ atom of a residue, rotating each environment randomly for training before voxelization. The voxel grid used a 0.5 Å resolution for the input and target tensors. Any alternative side chain conformations modeled were discarded keeping only the highest occupancy. For the voxelization only heavy atoms were used. For all structures selected for the respective sets we partitioned the residues of the protein into residues within 12 Å of a zinc ion and those further away (based on the distance to the Cɑ atom). A single zinc site will therefore be present many times in the dataset but each time translated and rotated in the box. A balanced set of examples was used sampling equal numbers of residues that are close to a zinc and residues randomly drawn from the non-zinc binding residues. The sampling of residues is based on the biological assembly of the protein, the voxelization is based on the full 3D structure including neighboring asymmetric units in the crystal structure. The environments are precomputed and stored using lxf compression in HDF5 files for concurrent access during training. In total, 252324 environments were voxelized for the training set, 6550 for the test set, 3067 for the validation set. The voxelization was implemented using ray [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1712.05889].

#### Model training
We used PyTorch 1.10 [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1912.01703] to train the model.  All layers of the network are convolutional layers with filter size 1.5 Å except for the fifth layer where a 8 Å filter is used to capture long range interactions. We use zero padding to keep the size of the boxes constant. Models were trained on a workstation with NVIDIA GTX3090 GPU and 32 CPU cores. Binary Cross Entropy [@doi:10.1007/s10479-005-5724-z] loss is used to train the model. The rectified linear unit (ReLU) non-linearity is used except for the last layer which uses a sigmoid function that  yields the probability for zinc per voxel. A dropout layer (p = 0.1) was used between the 5th and 6th layers. The network was trained using AdaDelta employing a stepped learning rate (lr=0.5, ɣ=0.9), a batch size of 150, and 12 epochs to train.


#### Hyperparameter tuning
We used the ray[tune] library [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1712.05889] to perform a hyperparameter search choosing 20 different combinations between the following parameters:

- filtersize: 3,4 (in units of 0.5 Å)
- dropout : 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5
- learning rate : 0.5, 1.0, 2.0
- gamma: 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9
- largest dimension 80, 100, 120

#### Grid Averaging 
The model takes as input a `(8,32,32,32)` tensor and outputs a `(1,32,32,32)` tensor containing the probability density for zinc centered on the Cɑ atom of the input residue. 
Predictions for a complete protein were obtained by voxelizing select residues of the protein (default all cysteines, histidines, aspartates, glutamates) and averaging the boxes using a global grid  (Figure @fig:method B). 98 % of the metal sites in the training data have at least one of those residues closeby wherefore this significant decrease in computational cost seems appropriate for most uses.  The global grid is obtained by computing the bounding box of all points and using a regular spaced (0.5 Å) grid. For each grid point in the global grid the predicted probability maps within 0.25 Å of the grid point are averaged. The search is sped up using the KD-Tree implementation in scipy[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2]. 

##### Metal ion placement
The global probability density is used to perform clustering of voxels above a certain probability threshold (default p=0.5, cutoff 7 Å) using agglomerative clustering implemented in scikit-learn [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1201.0490]. For each cluster the weighted average of the voxels in the cluster is computed using the probabilities for each point as the weight. This results in one metal placed per cluster.

##### Visualization 

We make available a command line program and interactive notebook allowing the user to visualize the results. The averaged probability map is stored as a `cube` file. The most likely metal coordinates for use in subsequent processing are stored in a `pdb`file. The command line program uses VMD [@pmid:8744570] to visualize the input protein and the predicted density, for the jupyter notebook 3Dmol.js/py3Dmol [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu829] is used. 

[@2cbastructurepaper]:  doi:10.1016/0022-2836(92)90531-N



#### Evaluation 

##### Comparison 
In order to standardize the evaluation between different tools, we always used the same test set used for the training of Metal1D and Metal3D. In order to compute standard metrics such as precision and recall, we chose to assess the performance of all assessed tools (Metal1D, Metal3D, BioMetAll, MIB) in a binary fashion. Any prediction within 5 Å of an experimental metal site is counted as true positive (TP). Multiple predictions by the same tool for the same site are counted as 1 TP. Any experimental site that has no predicted metal within 5 Å is counted as false negative (FN). A false positive (FP) prediction is a prediction that is not within 5 Å of a zinc site and also not within 5 Å of any other false positive prediction. If two or more false positive predictions are within 5 Å, they are counted as a single false positive prediction for the same site. In practice we first evaluate the true positive and false negative predictions and remove those from the set of predicted positions. The remaining predictions are all false positives and are clustered using AgglomerativeClustering with a radius of 5 Å. The number of false positives is determined from the number of clusters. Using the binary metric we assessed how good the models are at discovering sites and how much these predictions can be trusted.


In order to assess the quality of the predictions, we additionally compute for all the true positive predictions the mean of the Euclidean distance between the true and predicted site (mean absolute deviation MAD). For Metal1D, MIB, and BioMetAll, MAD was computed for all predictions above the threshold within 5 Å of a true zinc site where  $\sum\text{predicted sites} \geq \sum\text{ TP}$. This was done as some tools predict the same site for different residue combinations and we wanted to assess the general performance for all predicted sites above a certain cutoff and not just for the best predicted site above the cutoff. For Metal3D the weighted average of all voxels above the cutoff was used.


Precision was calculated as 

$$
\text{Precision} =\frac{\#\text{ correct metal sites}}{\#\text{ correct metal sites} + \#\text{ false positive clustered}} = \frac{\text{TP}}{\text{TP}+\text{FP}}
$$

Recall was calculated as 

$$
\text{Recall} =\frac{\#\text{ correct metal sites}}{\#\text{ correct metal sites} + \#\text{ not found metal sites}}  = \frac{\text{TP}}{\text{TP}+\text{FN}}
$$

##### Model assessment Metal3D
To evaluate the trained models we monitored loss and how accurately the model predicts the metal density of the test set. We used a discretized version of the Jaccard index setting each voxel either as 0 (no metal) or 1 (zinc present). We tested multiple different decision boundaries (0.5, 0.6, 0.75, 0.9) and also compared a slightly smaller centered box to remove any spurious density at the box edges, where the model has only incomplete information to make predictions.

The Jaccard index is computed as 
$$
J=\frac{\#\left|V_{p} \cap V_{exp}\right|}{\#\left|V_{p} \cup V_{exp}\right|},
$$
where $Vp$ is the array of voxels with predicted probability above the decision boundary and $V_{exp}$ is the array of voxels with the true metal locations also discretized at the same probability threshold.

##### HCA2 mutants 
The data for human carbonic anhydrase 2 (HCA2) mutants was extracted from refs [@doi:10.1021/bi00255a003; @doi:10.1021/ja00079a046;@doi:10.1021/bi00089a005; @doi:10.1073/pnas.92.11.5017; @doi:10.1021/bi9526692] and the crystal structure 2CBA [@2cbastructurepaper; @doi:10.2210/pdb2CBA/pdb] was used. The zinc was modeled using the zinc cationic dummy model forcefield [@pmid:11106157] and we verified that energy minimization produced the correct coordination environment. The Richardson rotamer library [@pmid:10861930] was used with the EVOLVE-ddG energy function to compute the most stable rotamer for a given mutation with the zinc present. The lowest-energy mutant was used for the prediction of the location of metals using Metal3D.